okay so we're now going to look at some
specific categories of grammars that are
not as powerful as full-fledged
context-sensitive grammars because that
would be too difficult to parse and at
the same time are more powerful than
regular context-free grammars and
therefore they can capture some types of
languages such as a to the nth power B
to the nth power which essentially is a
string of A's followed by a string of
string of beads of the same length which
is something that context-free grammars
cannot capture so before introduce those
let me first mention briefly the so
called tree substitution grammars which
are actually context-free grammars by an
equivalent to context-free grammars
before I move on to the ones that are
not context-free so tree substitution
grammar allows you to have terminals
that can generate entire tree fragments
and as I mentioned three substitution
grammars are formally equivalent to
context-free grammars however the next
step are from tree substitution grammars
is the so-called tier joining grammar
which is more powerful than context-free
grammars and the other example that
we're going to look at is called
combinatorial categorial grammar or CCG
which is also more powerful than
context-free grammars let's look at ta
G's or tags first so they're like tree
substitution grammars but they are large
Junction so what is the junction suppose
that you have a parse tree with the verb
phrase embedded inside it the a junction
operator allows you to create a new node
and to put it inside the tree and push
the existing sub tree further down so
you have a new verb phrase that gets the
original verb phrase as one of its
descendants so this operation cannot be
modeled in context-free grammars and it
can be used to generate languages such
as a to dance bar B to the nth power C
to the nth power or even WW which are
the so-called costs ego dependency so WW
is a string that is repeated twice so
for example the sender's mary gave a
book and a magazine to chen and mike
this is an example of a cost serial
dependency because book is associated
with chen and magazine is associated
mike so this kind of sentence cannot be
generated by context-free grammar but it
can be generated by a tag so
the expressive power is that tags are
formally more powerful than CF Gees but
at the same time they're not as powerful
as full context sensitive grammars let
me show you a little bit of a diversion
here there is a very interesting game
that you can download from the alt tag
game website it's a bunch of cards with
productions in to your joining grammars
that you can combine together to form
sentences and one fun thing to notice
here is that the original set of cards
includes some words that are not
appropriate for children therefore there
is a small slightly more pg-rated
version of the alt tag game designated
for families they can also download from
the same website so the other category
of grammars is called CCG it's very
popular these days for both parsing and
for generation it involves the
introduction of something called a
complex type so complex type is either X
/y or X backward slash Y so those
complex types take an argument of type Y
and return an arc an object of type X
and the difference between the direction
of the slash is that if you have a
forward slash X /y that means it Y
should appear on the right of X and if
you have X backward slash Y that means
that Y should appear on the left of X so
here's an example you have this simple
grammar here I is the pronoun labeled as
noun phrase books is another noun label
this noun phrase and now we have sleep
so what is the type of sleep well it's a
complex type that says that sleep is the
kind of thing that if you combine it
with a noun phrase on the right hand
side it will return a sentence similarly
the lexicon entry for enjoy is something
that if you combine it on the right with
the noun phrase then it took it turns
something of the same complex type as
sleep and here's an example of some
sentences so the sentence I sleep is
parsed in the following way I is a noun
phrase sleep is s backward slash and P
when the two are combined
the result is on s so I sleep is a valid
sentence according to this parse the
sentence I enjoy books again an example
here is of a transitive verb enjoy gets
combined with books by replacing the
noun phrase on the right and returning
the type on the left so the type for
enjoy books is s backward slash NP and
then when that gets combined to the
right with I it becomes s so this is a
very interesting example because it
shows you that from the s point of view
enjoy books and sleep have the exact
same syntactic structure again they're
both things that can be combined with
the subject to form a sentence so the
expressive power of CC Jesus that they
can generate the language a to the end B
to the N C to D and D to them for N
greater than zero and this is again
something that context-free grammars
cannot do and I want to acknowledge
Jonathan Coomer further like a
blackboard Patrick Lee tau for the
example shown on the slide so the next
topic is going to be very brief it's
about semantic parsing so everything
that we've discussed so far had to deal
with syntactic parsing we wanted to
build a syntactic representation of the
sender so that we know what are its
subject and verb and direct object and
so on but we never discussed the
semantics of the sentence in the last
few years there has been a lot of
interest in semantic parsing for
purposes such as question answering
generation summarization and so on
so what does semantic parsing look like
well it's a very simple idea every who
in your grammar is going to be
associated not just with a syntactic
structure but also with what is known as
compositional semantics so in
compositional semantics the semantics
the meaning of a word is the word itself
and then the meaning of a combination of
words is a formula that tells you how to
combine the meanings of the individual
words this is best illustrated with an
example so let's look at this very
simple sentence Xavier eats pizza so in
this grammar Xavier is associated with a
noun and the semantics
of this noun is just the word itself the
object they are presented by the word
Javier each is represented by the word
I'm sorry pizza is represented by the
meaning of the word pizza and eats as
the verb is represented as a logical
formula which corresponds to a lambda
function of two arguments X and Y where
the predicate is eat and X is the entity
doing the eating and Y is the entity
receiving the eating so at this point we
have to combine this lambda function
with its arguments to be able to come up
with a grounded expression for the
entire sentence so how does this work
well we first have to combine eaten
pizza together and we're going to
replace pizza with Y so this is what is
known as a substitution in formal logic
we're going to replace the lambda
function of two arguments each XY with a
new function that has Y a bound to pizza
and still remaining unbound variable X
so we still have a lambda expression
that is looking for a missing argument
to be combined with and this happens at
the next stage when we combine this verb
phrase note with the noun node for
Xavier we get the full meaning of the
sentence which is that eat is the
predicate and Xavier is substituted for
X in this expression and pizza remains
as it was before so the entire semantic
representation of the sentence is that
we have a predicate called eat with its
first argument being Xavier the second
argument being pizza so I'm going to go
into the semantic parsing into any more
detail but I want to encourage you to
look at some of the recent literature in
ACL on this topic as it seems to be one
of the hottest areas in NOP in the next
few years so I'm going to conclude this
segment with a short link short set of
links to pollens on parsing from the
linguistics Olympiad the ones that I
have selected as most relevant to this
section are 2d about the two-dimensional
parser this is a problem written by
Jason Eisner in the 2013 competition a
1/2 tree
a polyrhythm by North Smith Kevin gimbal
and Jason Eisner for the 2012 problem
set and then to Pallas related to
container to categoric combinatorial
grammars
CCG and combining categories in top
piece in both of those were used in the
2014 competition and finally grammar
rules which is a very simple problem
about context-free grammars from last
year's competition by Andrea Shelley and
Pat little so enjoy those problems and
when you've solved them you can check
their solutions on the same website oh
and I forgot one more example of a
parser for skating figures also written
by Pat little from one of the earliest
competitions from 2009 so this concludes
the section on alternative grammatical
formalisms and parsing thank you for
your attention